So let us go on now and talk about another
thing we gonna need in order to make
a page work, which we looked at very
briefly earlier, which are conditionals.
Now the Spice Girls song Wanna be
has a turn of conditionals in it.
For example, they sing, if you wanna be
my lover, you gotta get with my friends.
There's sort of an implied then there.
Sometimes we say, if you wanna be my
love then you gotta get with my friends.
And we wanna be able to talk to JavaScript
the same way the Spice Girls talk to
us, right?
We wanna be able to tell JavaScript
what happens under a certain condition.
So if statements are the way
that we can tell JavaScript
to only run code under
a certain condition.
So for example, maybe the spice
girls wrote this code because in
this if statement we have
imagined some object you.
And if you has a property called you
WannaBeMyLover that is value of true.
If that is true, if whatever is in
these parentheses after the F is true,
we call that the condition.
If that condition is true,
then whatever is between the curly
braces after that condition,
JavaScript will run.
So in this case the Spice Girl says
if the property you.wannaBeMyLover on
the object you is true.
Then the property gotta get
with my friends on the object
you is also going to be set to true.
Okay, so this is how we would encode
Spice Girls WannaBe in JavaScript,
if we wanted to, which, of course I do.
[LAUGH] So the idea is that
the code inside those curly braces
it's only gonna happen if
the condition is true.
They didn't really specify what happens
if you don't wanna be my lover,
but, [LAUGH] we know that the only time
that you got to get with my friends is if
you do wanna be my lover.
[LAUGH] So there is another option that
we have if we want to say one thing or
the other should happen
depending on a condition.
We have an extra keyword we
can add in there called else.
So we can combine if block with else
block, blocks are just the word for
those chunks of code in the curly braces,
we talked briefly about earlier.
So in this case,
does anybody know the line of the.
[LAUGH] Spice Girls song WannaBe
that this is referring to?
[LAUGH] So if you really bug me,
then I'll say goodbye.
If you don't really bug me,
they didn't really specify what happens,
but we could imagine that I'll say hello.
And want to keep dating you I don't know,
[LAUGH] so this is how we can do one thing
if the condition is true and a different
thing if the condition is false, okay?
It is going to allow us to make
decisions in our code, basically.
And sort of split, put a fork in the road
in front of JavaScript and say, hey,
JavaScript, take a moment,
figure out if this condition is true.
If it is go that way,
if it's not go this other way.
So if the condition is true and
else is if it's false, cool?
Okay, so let's take a look at this
one slightly less Poppi example.
[LAUGH] What do you think is
gonna happen when this code runs?
So if five is greater than four
console log greater than else
console log less than.
I'm hearing greater than that's because
we know numbers, we know how to count,
thanks to Sesame Street,
that five should be greater than four.
So let's prove it to ourselves,
let's go to our console and
just run this and make sure yes,
we get greater than.
And if I were to, let's say,
change this to a less than,
we would expect less than.
So this is the idea,
that we have the value of
this expression in the parenthesis
evaluated to a boolean.
And depending on whether that boolean
is true or false, whether the value of
the expression in the parenthesis,
the condition expression is true or false.
So we're gonna decide which of the if
block or the else block to do,
cool, great.
Now if we wanna get real fancy,
we can even chain most multiple else's and
IFS together to have like multiple
different conditions that might happen.
So for example,
here I have a little function that I'm
declaring just to wrap this all up.
This is called compare, and
it's taking in two things x and y,
we could assume their numbers.
And it is saying if x is greater than y,
then log out a message to that effect.
Else, so if x is not greater than y,
then there are two possibilities, right?
Either x is less than y or
x is equal to y.
So what we've got is another if here we
have an else if we can
chain them in this way.
So that essentially if this is false,
then this whole if else,
we're gonna jump into.
And so now we're gonna have to look at
another condition see if that's true.
If so then we're gonna do that and
if that's not true either then we're
gonna fall into this final else.
Make sense?
Cool, and we could prove it to
ourselves if I go back to my console,
declare this function.
So now if I compare, yeah, three and two,
what do you think is gonna happen?
>> X is greater.
>> We're gonna see that
is greater than message.
Yes, three is greater than two,
great, okay?
And if I put in two and
two, we should expect-
>> Equal.
>> Equal to because neither of those
two conditions that we had in here,
neither of them is true.
X greater than y, not true,
they're both two.
Two is not greater than two.
Also not sure that two is less than two,
so that means we fall into the third.
How did it put a space between x and y?
Great question, this is a fun
little trick in console logging.
Any guesses what's doing the spacing
here in my console log statement?
So let's take a look.
So for example here, it logged three space
the string is greater than, and then two.
And we can see because the three and
two are different that it's logging
the numbers themselves I didn't like
turn them into strings or anything.
Any guess what in this console log
statement here is doing that spacing?
>> It's gotta be the comma.
>> Commas, yeah, so
if I put commas in console log,
this is another, a nice little feature of
the fact that JavaScript doesn't care how
many arguments you give things.
Is that I can just keep adding
commas to pass in more and
more arguments to console log and it will.
I logged them all out on
the same line with spaces, so
fun little trick they're good eye.
>> Wouldn't work if you just did
console log x is greater than y without
the commas or would it break?
>> Let's find out.
Console log, I'm gonna do just two
string is greater than less has spaces in
it is greater than one let's find out.
Syntax error, no,
it does not work, JavaScript says when
it sees that space, it gets confused.
It says,
I don't know how to interpret that.
So, yeah, we need the commas,
if we have multiple things.
The other thing I could do is I
could put them all in a string,
like concatenate them all together
into a single string, but
why type more quotation
marks than I need to do?
As a lazy coder,
I don't wanna do that self, calm as it is.
All right, great point, okay, so
we said that the condition
evaluates to a boolean value.
So usually, we're gonna be passing
in some kind of expression that
evaluates like using one of
our comparison operators.
For example, we saw the lessons and
the greater than we also have our triple
equals a strict equality operator,
for example.
So if we have some variable forecast,
and the forecast is rain,
then we'll say remind people to
bring an umbrella, for example.
What happens if we pass
in some other value?
Well, our good friend JavaScript with
its loosey goosey type Venus is going
to try to read that value as a boolean,
it's going to convert that value.
Or we could say,
cast that value to a boolean and
this brings up the notion of truthiness.
So when a value gets turned into
a boolean, if it becomes true,
we say that, that value is not the same
thing as the boolean value true.
It's a different type of thing, but it
functions like the boolean value true, so
we say it's truthy.
Or if it functions like false,
we say it's falsey.
So truthiness is something that
JavaScript is gonna try to determine
the truthiness of any kind of
value that I pass in there.
Or if I pass in an expression that
evaluates to a value other than a boolean,
like a string or something else,
then JavaScript is gonna say all right
is that value truthy or is it falsy?
And then it's going to make a decision
accordingly, so for example, strings
if they're non-empty if they have some
characters inside of them, they're truthy.
So JavaScript will run that
console log line because I
passed in a truthy value,
we can prove it to ourselves.
This line will run, it sure did,
so what do you think is gonna happen here?
If I pass in the number zero,
do you think we'll hear zero is truthy or
zero is falsy?
>> Falsy.
>> Falsy, let's double check.
Zero is indeed falsy.
So yeah, this is maybe
the truthiness is maybe the built in
coalescing that we were
asking about earlier.
>> Something exists,
we'll treat it as whatever.
>> And it sort of depends.
So it depends where in our program
this value this string or number or
whatever it is shows up.
But when it's in the place of a condition
in a conditional in an if statement,
JavaScript is gonna look for truthiness.
If we were using it elsewhere,
like in a arithmetic operation,
JavaScript doesn't really
care about its truthiness.
It's gonna look at its numbness.
So it depends kind of where
this value shows up whether or
not JavaScript is trying to
make it a boolean, make sense?
Okay, so be careful because sometimes you
can be passing in what you thought was
gonna be a boolean.
And maybe you thought it was going
to be false or something, but
it turns out it's actually a string and
so then it's truthy.
And so this can be a gotcha sometimes
that trips us up as coders.